Time series forecasting stands
at the heart of decision making
in many industries, whether it
is forecasting sales, supply
chain analysis, predicting stock
market trends, or anticipating
weather patterns.
In today's video, we will show a
practical example how to use an
AutoML approach, leveraging the
power of CrateDB, PyCaret,
and MLFLow to transform data
into insightful predictions.
Choosing PyCaret, CrateDB,
and MLFLow for creating a time
series forecasting model is
driven by their unique features
and strengths, especially when
dealing with large data sets,
and aiming for efficient
development cycles.
PyCaret stands out for its
AutoML capabilities, automating
the tedious process of model
selection and hyperparameter
tuning.
With just a few lines of code,
we can compare, evaluate and
refine dozens of models to find
the best performer.
MLFLow helps to operationalize
your machine learning
initiatives.
It tracks models, parameters,
and outcomes, and enables to
iterate rapidly and efficiently
towards the optimal forecasting
solution while also monitoring
your model in production use.
Before we start, we need to
ensure our toolbox is ready.
This involves installing all
necessary Python libraries.
If you're using an environment
like Google Collab, make sure to
use the absolute URL for the
requirements text file.
Next, we need a running CrateDB
instance.
The quickest way to get started
is with the CrateDB Cloud
offering.
It's free to sign up and you can
deploy a cluster with a few
clicks.
Please choose the correct
connection string depending on
whether you're connecting to
CrateDB Cloud or a local
instance.
If you are running CrateDB
Cloud, you will need to specify
the username, password and host
name of your cluster.
With our database connectivity
set up, we'll import the
necessary Python modules and
pull and merge the two data
sets.
We also introduce a new column,
total_sales, calculated by
multiplying the number of items
sold by their unit price.
The prepared data set is then
imported into a new table in
CrateDB.
This makes our data accessible
and ready for the analysis we
aim to perform.
Having set our data foundation,
we shift gears towards model
creation and ensure that our
machine learning experiments are
trackable by configuring MLFlow
to use our CrateDB instance.
This integration is crucial for
maintaining a clear record of
our modeling journey.
As a first step, we want to
understand our data.
By plotting our total sales over
time alongside a trend line, we
gain insights into the
underlying patterns and
fluctuations in sales.
The plot reveals some
interesting insights about the
sales operation of the company.
The blue line represents the
total sales and it shows
considerable fluctuations
throughout the period.
There are notable peaks and
troughs suggesting periods of
high sales followed by periods
of lower sales.
The orange trend line provides
an overview of the general sales
trend over the years.
It appears that there's a
gradual upward trend in sales
from 2014 to 2021.
This indicates that despite the
periodic fluctuations, the
overall sales have been on the
rise over the years.
To understand the key components
of our time series data, we
outlined here more detailed
observations using PyCaret.
We train a model to predict
future sales from past data.
First, we tell PyCaret what
we want to predict the total
sales.
We use the month to organize our
data over time.
We also decide to keep track of
our work with MLFlow and plan
to predict sales for the next 12
months.
Next PyCaret compares 28
models to find which one
predicts best.
It turns out that the Extra
Trees model, which adjusts for
seasonal changes is the top
choice based on the Mean
Absolute Scaled Error metric.
However, your exact numbers
might vary a bit in each run
because PyCaret uses
different data splits to test
the models accuracy.
This method, called cross
validation, helps make sure our
model is reliable and doesn't
just memorize the data before
continuing.
It's best to have a look at the
performance of the models.
The above plots show that all
three of the selected models
seem to predict quite well, with
the first one at least at a
glance, performing probably
best.
Now we optimize these top models
via hyperparameter tuning, which
is just one line of code in
PyCaret.
The hyperparameter tuning tries
to improve the performance of
the models and needs to be
carefully reviewed also to avoid
overfitting of the model.
Now let's move to a powerful
technique in modern machine
learning, model blending, which
combines the results of multiple
models for the final prediction
to outperform the capabilities
of a single model.
As you can observe, we've
trained 28 models, tuned and
blended the top performing three
models in PyCaret.
It's all done with just a few
lines of code which would have
taken hours or days in a manual
approach.
This makes AutoML not only
powerful, but also easy to apply
to many forecasting tasks.
In the final step, we train our
created model on the entire data
set.
Until now, we've kept some data
aside for testing.
After that, it can be used to
make predictions on new, unseen
data.
The predict model method gives
us predictions for our data,
helping us to see how our model
thinks sales will look in the
future.
In this video, we turn data into
predictions, showing how easy
and powerful an AutoML
approach can be.
With just a few steps, anyone
can turn historical data into
future insights, making time
series forecasting easy and
available to many users even
without deep machine learning
and programming skills.